<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Christian Foundation, June, 1880</title>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>April 25, 2009</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">28601</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2009-04-25">April 25, 2009</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Bryan Ness, David King, and the Online Distributed
            Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This book was produced from scanned images of public domain
            material from the Google Print project.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Christian Foundation,</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Or,</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Scientific and Religious Journal</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Vol. 1. No 6.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">June, 1880.</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Work of the Holy Spirit. What Is It? What Are Its Relations And Uses?</head>

<p>
I know of no religious people who intentionally deny his
agency in creation, providence or redemption. But men differ
widely in their opinions concerning it and its relations and
uses. Many honest-hearted persons have been educated in
the theory of an immediate and direct operation of the Spirit
upon the hearts of sinners in order to their conversion, which
they often call the baptism of the Holy Spirit. On this account
thousands of prayers are offered up continually to induce
the Lord to pour the Spirit upon sinners and convert and save
them. And happy meetings are attributed to wonderful outpourings
of the Spirit. What is his work? It is said that
he moved upon the face of the great deep, and that God
said, Let there be light, and there was light. This operation
upon physical nature gave to our planet cosmic light, and the
darkness, which had shut out the light of the heavenly bodies
through the long lapse of time extending back from Moses'
first day to the beginning in which creation took place, was
removed. Activity having begun in matter, periods of light
and darkness alternate until the conditions of our planet are
so changed that the light of the heavenly bodies becomes the
light of this world; and the great work of the Spirit having
accomplished its purposes, is classified with the extraordinary
efforts of God in bringing into existence this beautiful planetary
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
system of ours. It is, consequently, a work of the past.
But the work of the Spirit is not over.
</p>

<p>
There must be a moral and spiritual system, as well as a
physical. As the material system would be unworthy of its
creator, were it not for the fact that it is governed by law,
which is equivalent to saying, it is a system, so the moral and
spiritual must be under law, in order to the accomplishment
of the ends of its creation, which is equal to saying, it is God's
moral government. But how is this system to be brought into
existence? And how is it to be perpetuated? In answering
these questions let us remember the law of analogy, based
upon the simple axiom that God is a God of order. In the
use of the analogy about to be instituted we simply pass
through the outer court of the temple of God in order to behold
the beauties of the inner. Then, as the world of matter
existed as an inactive, confused mass, surrounded by an envelope
of darkness which shut out the light of the heavens,
so the human family, without the knowledge of God, without
the light of knowledge, left to its own mental and moral wanderings,
without law or system or order, would present all the
horrors of pagan darkness and woe. Then the Spirit of God
must move again in obedience to the mandate of the Most
High. And as the object to be accomplished is now connected
with mind, the Spirit now moves upon the face of the great
deep of the human heart or mind. But shall he move upon
all hearts throughout all time in order to dispel moral darkness,
and so the extraordinary become the ordinary? Or
shall he move in an extraordinary manner and cause the light
of revelation to flash across the world and dispel the darkness
consequent upon the mental and moral condition of the children
of men, and give us a glorious lamp of light, along with
law, order and system? And has the extraordinary given
place to the ordinary? And what is the use of the ordinary if
we have the extraordinary, or the use of the extraordinary if
we have the ordinary?
</p>

<p>
As the operation of the Spirit upon the face of the great
deep was to dispel the surrounding darkness and reveal the
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
sun in the heavens, with all the lesser light bearers, which are
dependent upon the sun for the light they give to our planet,
so the extraordinary movement of the Spirit upon the world
of mind was to give us light in the place of darkness and reveal
the Son of God, who is the <q>Sun of Righteousness,</q> who
rose <q>with healing in his beams.</q> This work of the Spirit
upon the world of mind is doubted by no Christian, for <q>holy
men of old spake as they were moved upon by the Holy Spirit.</q>
The knowledge thus communicated was given to the prophets
of old, without action upon their part&mdash;that is to say, they did
not attain unto it by taking thought what they should speak
or say, for in the proper hour, when it was needful, it was
given to them. This grand procedure was kept up until the
<q>Mystery of Christ</q> was revealed, or until the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ,
burst upon the vision of the world. Now, he being the
brightness of the Father's glory and the express image of his
person, and it having pleased the Father that in him all fullness
should dwell, he is the <q>Light of the World</q>&mdash;God's great
light bearer. Along with the revelation of Christ comes a
revelation of all the lesser lights that shine out in the mental
and moral heavens, who have been, and are, dependent upon
him for their knowledge, or light. In order to give the world
this revelation of Christ, Jehovah selected his own men, and
confirmed their mission, and the Spirit moved upon their
hearts to give light until the Christ, himself, with all his satellites,
should shine forth in the light of life. These men
were the ancient prophets of the <q>High and Holy One.</q>
They were teachers sent from God. Their mission was confirmed
by the wondrous works which they were enabled to
perform. Nicodemus understood this matter when he said,
<q>Rabbi, we know thou art a teacher sent from God, for no
man can do these works which thou dost except God be with
him.</q>
</p>

<p>
The little Jewish maiden who waited on Naaman's wife understood
it, for she said to her, <q>Would to God my Lord were
with the prophet in Samaria! for he would cure him of his
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
leprosy.</q> It is said of the disciples of Christ that they
<q>went everywhere preaching the word, the Lord working
with them and confirming the word with signs following.</q>
And also, that the great salvation, <q>which at the first began
to be spoken unto us by the Lord, was confirmed unto us by
those who heard him, God also bearing them witness both with
signs and wonders, and divers miracles and gifts of the Holy
Spirit.</q> And that the apostles preached the gospel with the
Holy Spirit sent down from heaven.
</p>

<p>
It was communicated to the prophets and apostles by the
Savior, and to the world at large through them. As proof of
this proposition Peter says, <q>The prophets searched diligently
with reference to the time which the Spirit of Christ,
that was in them, did signify when it testified beforehand of
the sufferings of Christ and of the glory which should follow.</q>
It was an important work for Christ to teach his
apostles, and when they had heard him through all his toils
they were not suffered to go forth, or shine as stars in the
church's crown, until they were moved upon by the Spirit of
God to bring to their remembrance those things which Jesus
had taught them. But one other course could have been pursued,
and there were insurmountable difficulties in the way of
its adoption, and that was to make the extraordinary ordinary
by causing the Holy Spirit to move upon all hearts
throughout all time, and give to each member of the race,
regardless of his character and the manner in which he might
abuse it, the entire revelation. The first difficulty is in the
fact that wicked men who wilfully deceive would have confronted
the best men upon the earth, and confusion without
remedy would have been the result of leaving our world
without a common and infallible test.
</p>

<p>
Another difficulty appears, in the fact that it would have
compromised the purity of God through the presence of the
Holy Spirit in the hearts of all the vile and abominable sinners
of earth. There was one way to avoid these results, and
that was to irresistibly destroy all disposition in human hearts
to have their own way, and so remain unworthy of the presence
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
of the Divine Spirit; but this would have been a complete
destruction of moral freedom along with all the principles
of accountability, and consequently a destruction of
God's moral government. Moral freedom was so sacred with
God that <q>the spirit of the prophets was subject to the
prophet.</q> Hence, the importance of the searcher of hearts
choosing his own prophets out from among men. <q>God,
who in ancient times and diverse manners, spake in time past
unto the fathers by the prophets, hath, in these last days,
spoken unto us by his son.</q> The Lord of Hosts guarded this
great work with reference to the deliverance of man by the
most severe penalty. The law governing the prophets was in
these words: <q>And that prophet which shall speak a word
in my name which I commanded him not, or that shall
speak in the name of other gods, even that prophet shall die.</q>
He guarded his own infinite and spotless purity. While
he was <q>in the generation of the righteous, he was far from
the wicked.</q> So there was always, from the time of Adam's
offense till the present such a thing as being <q>without God.</q>
</p>

<p>
When the Jewish people became apostate in the times of
Malachi, who was the last Old Testament prophet, the Holy
Spirit left the world. The proof is in the Savior's words to
his disciples: <q>If I go not away, the Comforter will not
come unto you.</q> And one of the witnesses said, <q>The Holy
Spirit was not yet given because Jesus was not yet glorified.</q>
During the long night of apostacy between Malachi and
Zechariah, there was a time when <q>all were gone out of the
way;</q> <q>when there were none that did good, no, not one;</q>
<q>when darkness covered the earth, and gross darkness the
people;</q> when they had not so much as <q>the dayspring from
on high, to give knowledge of salvation by the remission of
sins.</q> <q>The temple of God was a den of thieves.</q> The
commandments of God were made void through the traditions
of men, and there was not a people upon the earth prepared
for the Lord, worthy of his introduction among them
<hi rend='smallcaps'>as the Son of God</hi>. The dignity of his person, consequent
upon his being the Son of God, along with his purity, rendered
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
it improper for him to be manifested, in his introduction
as the Son of God, to a den of thieves. So a people
must be prepared for the occasion. Hence John the Baptist
was sent from God to prepare or make ready a people for the
Lord. He was the <q>dayspring from on high,</q> sent to give
knowledge of salvation unto the people by the remission of
their sins, but the ultimate of his work is expressed in these
words: <q>But that he, Christ, might be made manifest unto
Israel, therefore came I baptizing with water.</q> Which was
as much as to say, He will not be made manifest to Israel
unless a people in Israel is made ready for him. Therefore
John was his forerunner, to prepare the way before him.
</p>

<p>
In doing this work he proclaimed the kingdom of God is at
hand, and <q>preached the baptism of repentance for the remission
of sins.</q> And many people were prepared for the Lord,
and finally he is acknowledged, from the eternal world, as the
Son of God, while he is yet in the presence of all those who
were present at his baptism and heard John say, <q>Behold the
Lamb of God, who taketh away the sin of the world.</q> The
Savior now calls about him twelve disciples, and they make
and baptize many more disciples. John the Baptist and Jesus
Christ, as prophets, were under the influence of the Holy
Spirit, and were engaged in the grandest work ever known
among men. But, so far as a wicked world was concerned, it
must be redeemed from moral pollution first, and then await
the day of Pentecost for the gift of the Holy Spirit. Thus
keeping before our minds his relations to men, we ask what
was his work and relations from Pentecost and onward? On
that day he came upon the disciples, who were already converted
and pardoned; so it was not for <emph>those purposes</emph> that they
were baptized in the Holy Spirit. Jesus had said to them,
long before this, <q>Now ye are clean through the words which
I have spoken unto you.</q> And the wicked Jews had <q>closed
their eyes and stopped their ears, lest they should see with
their eyes and hear with their ears and understand with their
hearts and be converted and healed.</q> And Satan himself
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
took the word out of the hearts of some <q>lest they should believe
and be saved.</q>
</p>

<p>
And all this took place before the Holy Spirit was given to
any, whether good or bad. So we must look outside of sinners
for the presence and wonderful work of the Spirit of God,
and also outside of their conversion for its immediate and
direct agency. Jesus said to his disciples, <q>If I go away I
will send you <hi rend='smallcaps'>another</hi> comforter, even the Spirit of Truth,
<emph>whom the world can not receive</emph>.</q> And again, he said, <q>Howbeit,
when he, the Spirit of Truth, is come, he shall guide you
into all truth.</q> <q>He will show you things to come.</q> <q>He
shall take of the things of mine and shall show them unto
you.</q> <q>He shall testify of me.</q> Does this look like extraordinary
work? Was it to be continued? Did it not belong to
a creative period, that was to be followed by the existence of a
system, or government, in which law and order would take
the place of the extraordinary operations of the Spirit of God?
</p>

<p>
I wish to present the promise of God which relates to the
baptism of the disciples in the Holy Spirit upon Pentecost,
that we may discover, upon an analysis of its terms, its nature
and place in the reign of favor. It is in these words: <q>And
it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will
pour out of my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and
your daughters shall prophecy, and your young men shall
see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams; and on
my servants and on my handmaidens I will pour out in
those days of my spirit; and they shall prophesy.</q> Jesus
gave his disciples the great commission to go into all the
world and preach the Gospel to every creature, but said,
<q>Tarry ye in Jerusalem until ye be endued with power from
on high.</q> After the Savior ascended it is said that he received
the promise of the Father and shed forth that which
was seen and heard on the day of Pentecost. What was the
result? They spake with tongues. They prophesied. They
healed the sick. They raised the dead. They bestowed
spiritual gifts. They were guided into all truth. They
<q>preached the gospel with the Holy Spirit sent down from
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
heaven;</q> and in this fact we have the beautiful figure of
rivers of living water flowing out of their hearts, for Jesus
said, <q>He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said,
out of his belly (From the Heart, inward part) shall flow
rivers of living water.</q> This, the historian says, <q>He spake
of the spirit which they that believed on him were to receive,
because the Holy Spirit was not yet given, for Jesus was not
yet glorified.</q> Hence, we are authorized to look for its fulfillment
at Pentecost, and also in the preaching of the gospel
of Christ. Paul says, <q>My speech and my preaching was not
with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of
the Spirit and of power: that your faith should not stand in
the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.</q> Here is the
basis of our faith.
</p>

<p>
All those who believe on Christ through the words of the
apostles have a faith that stands in the power of God. The
apostle further adds, <q>Now we have not received the spirit of
the world, but the Spirit which is of God; that we might
know the things that are freely given to us of God. Which
things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom
teacheth, but which the Holy Spirit teacheth, comparing
spiritual things with spiritual.</q> Before the Savior left the
world he breathed upon his apostles and said, <q>Receive ye the
Holy Spirit,</q> adding, <q>Whosesoever sins ye remit they are remitted
unto them, and whosesoever sins ye retain they are
retained.</q> So it pleased the Father to <q>save men through
the foolishness of preaching.</q> And Paul said, <q>We preach
not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your
servants for Jesus's sake. For God, who commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ. But we have this treasure in earthen
vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and
not of us.</q>
</p>

<p>
The mystery of Christ was revealed to all nations for the
obedience of faith. Paul says, the mystery of God's will was
made known according to his good pleasure which he purposed
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
in himself, and that he was <q>made a minister
according to the dispensation of God which was given to him
for us, to fulfill the word of God, even the mystery which had
been hid from ages and from generations, but now is made
manifest to his saints. To whom God would make known
what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the
Gentiles; which is Christ in you, the hope of glory, whom we
preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom,
that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.</q>
<q>Whereunto,</q> he says, <q>I also labor, striving according to
<emph>his working</emph>, which <emph>worketh in me mightily</emph>.</q> From all that
we have before us it appears that all things in the gospel of
Jesus Christ constitute, simply, <q>the ministration of the
Spirit written upon the hearts of New Testament apostles and
prophets, or teachers, by the Spirit of the living God, and that
we have in their preaching and teaching the rivers of living
water, flowing out from the throne of God to slake the thirst
of a famishing world, and that all this is attributable to the
descent of the Holy Spirit upon them.</q> Such being the case,
<q>the gospel is the power of God unto salvation unto every
one that believes.</q> And in it Jesus Christ, the Sun and Lord,
in the moral and spiritual universe, shines forth with all his
satellites as the light of the world. The creative period is
now past. The extraordinary efforts of the divine Spirit are
past. <q>The darkness is past and the true light now shineth.</q>
The ordinary has taken the place of the extraordinary. What
good would it do to have a repetition of the extraordinary?
Would it give us another gospel, and confirm it by signs and
wonders and divers miracles? Would it give us another
Christ? Would it give us other rivers of living water? or
another word of reconciliation? What good would be accomplished
by a repetition of the energies of the Divine Spirit, as
they are known in the history of the new creation? Do we
need these to dispel the darkness? <q>The darkness is past.</q>
Do we need them to give us light? <q>The true light now
shineth.</q> Do we need them to give us more truth? Jesus
said of the Spirit: <q>He shall guide you into all truth.</q> The
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
Roman Catholic priest, in his discussion with Mr. Chillingworth,
planted himself upon this promise, made by the Savior
to his apostles, as the proof of the claim of Romanists to the
attribute of infallibility. Said he: <q>If the attribute of
infallibility is not in the possession of the church, the promise
of the Savior has failed.</q> To this Mr. Chillingworth
replied: <q>It would be well for us to determine who is meant
by the pronoun <q><emph>you</emph>,</q> found in the language, before we put up
the high claim to infallibility.</q> The promise was fulfilled to
a jot, and we have the <q>all truth</q> in the teachings of the
apostles. Let those who extend that promise to themselves
meet the Catholics' argument upon it and save themselves if
they can. We now enjoy the Spirit of God through faith
along with all the beneficial, practical and comforting and
redeeming results of the baptism of the apostles and first
Christians in the Holy Spirit. What more do we need?
Faith lays hold upon Christ; upon the Holy Spirit; and upon
God. The just live by faith, and drink of the rivers that
flow from the great fountain of the Holy Spirit, which was
created in the hearts of the apostles and New Testament
teachers. The effects of their baptism in the Spirit are ours
through faith. And all the world may have them through
faith. They are free to all. The government of God is now
set up. Order and law reigns throughout. Jesus said, <q>So
is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the
ground, and should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed
should spring and grow up, he knoweth not how, for the earth
bringeth forth fruit of herself; first the blade, then the ear,
after that the full corn in the ear.</q> The kingdom of God
now bringeth forth fruit of herself, the good seed, the word of
God, having been cast into it. Its glorious blessings are open
to all men. The prophet says: <q>Ho, every one that thirsteth,
come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money, come, ye,
buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money
and without price. Wherefore do ye spend money for that
which is not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth
not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. Incline
your ear, and come unto me; hear, and your soul shall live....
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous
man his thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord and he
will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will
abundantly pardon.</q> <q>The Spirit and the bride say come,
and let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will let him
take of the waters of life freely.</q> Yes, <emph>freely</emph>. There is no
obstruction. All are without excuse.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Credibility Of The Evidence Of The
Resurrection Of Christ.</head>

<p>
Our senses are the means by which we were made competent
witnesses. They are the bed-rock of evidence. We know
facts and truths, both comprehensible and incomprehensible,
by the same means. We are as competent to testify of that
which we do not comprehend as we are to testify of the most
ordinary fact. As competent to bear testimony to the fact of
a sweeping tornado as to the fact of a gentle breeze. As competent
to bear testimony to the fact that water freezes and becomes
hard as to testify to the truth of its being a fluid. As
competent to testify to a fact that we never before experienced
as to one that we have. Without this competency no man
could be justly held responsible for slander or perjury.
</p>

<p>
We gain knowledge by means of our senses, and all
lying and perjury is outside of our senses, having no connection
with them. We can, in truth, testify to that which we
have seen, heard, tasted, smelt or felt, and to such only.
That which somebody else thus witnessed may be testified by
him, but not by me, unless I, too, was connected with it by
means of my senses. Wise men may be deceived in some
things, but fools can not be deceived in others. Things addressing
themselves to our senses are things about which we
can not be so deceived as to truthfully deny that they ever
occurred. I know a live man when I see him by the same
means I know a dead man.
</p>

<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>

<p>
Being competent to bear witness to a new fact, to one heretofore
unexperienced, I would have been competent to bear
witness to the death, burial and resurrection of the Christ, in
case I had lived in his day, and had been as familiar with him
as his witnesses. By which I mean to say, they were competent
witnesses; every way qualified to know assuredly whether
the Savior rose from the dead. <emph>They could not be deceived</emph>
about the matter. They were not. If they were honest men
they told the truth, for they say, We saw, and heard, and our
hands have handled. Then the entire Christian religion, with
its immortal blessings, stands or falls upon the honesty of the
Savior's witnesses. Martyrdom has been universally conceded
to be an evidence of sincerity; there may be a few exceptions
to this general rule, but even they are not parallel
cases. There is a story of a man who endured with great
fortitude all the tortures of the rack, denying the fact with
which he was charged. When he was asked afterwards how
he could hold out against all the tortures, he said: I painted
a gallows on the toe of my shoe, and when the rack stretched
me, I looked on the gallows, and bore the pain to save my
life. This man denied a plain fact under torture, but he did
it to save his life.
</p>

<p>
When criminals persist in denying their crimes they do it
with the hope of saving their lives. Such cases are not parallel.
Who ever heard of persons dying <emph>willingly</emph> in attestation
of a false fact? Can we be made to believe that any set of
rational men could be found who would <emph>willingly die</emph> in attestation
of the false fact that the President of the United States
is now on the throne of England? The witnesses of Christ
died in attestation of those facts which they say they saw, and
heard, and knew, among which was the great fact of the resurrection
of Christ. It was their privilege to quit their evidence,
at any instant, and save their lives, but they did not do
it. Who can account for this strange course of conduct upon
the ground of dishonesty?
</p>

<p>
If a man reports an uncommon fact that is a plain object of
sense, and we do not believe him, it is because we suspect his
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
honesty and not his senses. If we are satisfied that the reporter
is sincere, of course we believe. So our case is now in
this shape: First, the great facts of the gospel of Christ addressed
themselves, as simple facts, to the senses of men; second,
no witness could affirm those facts honestly unless they
took place; third, the witnesses to those facts gave all the evidences
of sincerity and honesty that are possible. Reputation
for truthfulness and honesty has never rested upon any evidence
that is not found in great abundance in the lives of the
witnesses of Christ. It is said that men die for false opinions:
very true, but their sufferings and death, nevertheless, prove
that they were sincere. True philosophy does not charge men
who die for their opinions with dishonesty. Men may be mistaken
in some things, but mistaken men are <emph>not cheats</emph>; are
not insincere or dishonest. But the witnesses of Christ could
not, in the nature of the case, belong to this class; they could
not be mistaken about any such facts as those of the gospel.
The only fort to be held in order to hold the gospel of Christ
is the sincerity of his witnesses. When a man gets rid of the
evidence upon which the reputation of those witnesses for
honesty rests, he has removed the only evidence upon which
it is possible for him to build a reputation for truth and honesty.
So, if a man succeeds in sinking the gospel of Christ,
he succeeds, at the same time and by the same means, in sinking
himself. This is the philosophic and logical conclusion,
from which there is no escape.
</p>

<p>
Let us look around one of the Savior's witnesses and see
what we can discover. First, we find Saul, a bold and fearless
Jew, a Roman citizen by birth, and a pharisee in the Jews
religion; a legalist by profession; laboring under all the prejudices
of the straitest sect of the pharisees; persecuting the
Savior's disciples to the death. He was a man of no mean
attainments. His worldly prospects were greater than those
of any other man known to be converted from among the
Jews. The testimony which he submits for our consideration
is like the evidence of all the others. It consists in simple
facts about which there was no possibility of being mistaken,
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
for the facts were seen and heard. Allowing that Saul did
neither see nor hear the Savior, he was insincere. And if he
was, then we shall always be at a loss to know what constitutes
the basis of an honest reputation. Did he give his evidence,
knowing that it was false, with the intention of deceiving?
If so, what were his motives? He could have had no reasonable
inducements. Christianity could not furnish him with
temporal power, credit, or interest during all his lifetime. So
far as credit was concerned, in the affair of his conversion, he
knew that the world had none to give. He knew that preaching
Christ crucified was <q>to the Jews a stumbling-block, and
to the Greeks foolishness.</q> He knew that the Christ himself
had been crucified. Credit or reputation was lying upon the
anti-christian side of the gospel. He was already in high
esteem among the Jews; a <q><emph>ring-leader</emph>,</q> pursuing the course
of action calculated in the very nature of things to advance
him higher in their estimation. His entire life demonstrated
the fact that he expected nothing of the Jews, for it was spent,
with trifling exceptions, among the Gentiles. His enterprise
was with them, for he was sent to them.
</p>

<p>
The difficulties lying in the way of any worldly emoluments
were many and great. He had to contend with the
authority and policy of the rulers; with the interest, credit
and clique of the priests; with the prejudices and passions of
the people; with the shrewdness and pride of the philosophers.
Every man acquainted with ancient history knows
that the established religion with which he would necessarily
come in conflict, was interwoven with their civil institution,
and supported by the rulers as <emph>an essential</emph> part of their government.
The Romans allowed a great many religious systems
to exist, but they allowed no such thing as a religion destructive
of the genius of paganism. The existing religions
were many, and embraced the system of many gods ruling
under one <q>Master God,</q> as <q>his members,</q> or representatives.
The antagonism between Paganism and Christianity
may be seen at once, in the fact that the Gospel of Christ was
death to all the lower gods. On this account the first Christians
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
became at once the object of national hatred and scorn.
This accounts for the fact that bloody Rome baptized herself
in Christian blood in spite of all her tolerance of religion.
</p>

<p>
The apostle met with sufferings on all sides; and having
perfect liberty of recantation at any moment, how did it come
to pass, if he was insincere, that he did not recant? Was he
rational? Let his writing answer! They are admired by the
best minds of earth. If he was irrational, let us have many
more insane writers! Was he honest? If not, who is honest?
Could he be deceived about the facts which he saw and
heard? No! If he was, who can't be? He could not be
mistaken, for he <emph>saw</emph>, and <emph>heard</emph>,
and <emph>felt</emph>&mdash;even to <emph>blindness</emph>,
and, also, to the receiving of his sight. He was sincere. He
suffered long as a bold defender of the Christian religion,
and died a martyr's death at last. Let us work on, suffer on,
hope on, <q>hope in death,</q> and live forever! So mote it be.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><q>Broad-Gauge Religion.</q>&mdash;Shall The Conflict Cease?</head>

<p>
First. <q>A portion of the Church of England, comprising
those who claim to hold a position, in respect to doctrine and
fellowship, intermediate between the old High Church party
and the modern Low Church, or evangelical party, a term of
recent origin,</q> having originated in the last half century,
<q>which has been loosely applied to other bodies of men holding
liberal or comprehensive views of Christian doctrine and
fellowship.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Webster.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Side by side with these various shades of High and Low
Church, another party of a different character has always existed
in the Church of England. It is called by different
names: Moderate, Catholic, or <hi rend='italic'>Broad Church</hi>, by its friends:
Latitudinarian or Indifferent, by its enemies. Its distinctive
character is the desire of comprehension. Its watchwords
are <hi rend='italic'>charity</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>toleration</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Conybeare.</hi>
</p>

<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Broadgauge.</hi> This word is connected, in its origin, with
railroads. Its radical idea is that of distance. It is credited
by Webster to Simmonds in these words, <q>A wide distance
(usually six or seven feet) between the rails on a railway, in
contradistinction from the narrow gauge of four feet eight inches
and a half.</q> The watch-word, <q>charity,</q> is a term that has
been much abused. <q>Charity is a grace of heavenly mien.</q>
It is the <q>end of the commandment.</q> <q>The law was not
made for a righteous man, but for the lawless, and the disobedient,
etc.</q> It is love, in the New Testament sense of the term,
as modified by all the essential elements of the Christian religion,
so it is <q>the fulfilling of the law.</q> It is not passion,
<emph>but affection</emph>. To my sensuous life all my passions belong.
The brute has also a sensuous life. But man has, in addition
to this, an intellectual life. Passion always passes away with
its object, but affection remains to soften the heart years after
its object is gone.
</p>

<p>
My intellectual nature is the field of all legitimate gospel
operations with reference to the production of a Christian life
and character. As a divine affection, charity or love springs
out of union with God, or being made a <q>partaker of the
divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the
world through lusts.</q> Such being the height of its bed-rock,
it is said, <q>Every one that loveth is born of God and knoweth
God.</q> And it is also said, <q>He that saith I know him and
keepeth not his commandments is a liar.</q> This
strong language correlates with the fact that charity expresses
the idea of love as an attribute of divine life, known
as the life of God. It is an attribute belonging to those who
have made the high attainment of a spiritual or mental condition
which places them beyond the need of penal laws to restrain
them from crime. Its <emph>measure</emph> is the <emph>love of God</emph>. Its
full import may be expressed in these words, <hi rend='italic'>loving as God
loves</hi>.
</p>

<p>
After enumerating many of the Christian graces an
apostle said, Above all these things put on charity, which is
the bond of perfectness. So charity, or rather its possessor, is
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
no willful truth <q>butcherer,</q> for charity believeth all things
(<emph>or all truth</emph>); hopeth all things (<emph>promised</emph>); rejoiceth, not in
iniquity, but in the truth. It has no <q>stock</q> in known error,
for it <q>abounds in all knowledge and judgment,</q> and <q>approves
things that are excellent.</q> It is noble and right to
let <q>love,</q> or <q>charity have her perfect work,</q> to be, or
rather try to be, as charitable as God himself; but it is absurd
and preposterous to go beyond or try to be more charitable.
<q>It is enough that the disciple be <emph>as his master</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Men are guilty of this presumption when they, in feigned
charity, go beyond the word of the Lord, or beyond the truth
in their expressions of kindness.
</p>

<p>
There is a great deal of love in this world that lacks the
elements of <emph>perfectness</emph>. It is not the <q>love of God,</q> or
loving as God loves. It is not the attribute of a divine life.
There is no charity in influencing a person, willfully, to stop
short or go beyond the truth in Christian faith or obedience.
There is no charity in giving a man money knowingly to purchase
whisky to get drunk upon. Charity never conflicts
with truth or right. On the contrary, it endeavors to bring
all men to the standard of truth and rectitude.
</p>

<p>
The phrase <q>Broad-gauge</q> seems to have been gotten up
to express the idea of an intelligent relaxation from <q>human
creeds</q> as bonds of union and fellowship. In this sense we
all ought to be the advocates of <q>Broad-gauge religion.</q>
We should cultivate the spirit of gospel liberality until we
utterly disregard and put away all human creeds.
</p>

<p>
It is a trite saying, that one extreme begets another;
against this error we should guard with great caution. To
succeed in religion, we must remember, always, that we have
in the word of God a standard of truth and right that will
always govern us according to heaven's will. Many persons,
forgetting this truth, have been led to conclude that departures
from the word of truth, as a matter of <q>liberality,</q> or <q>broad-gauge
religion,</q> are justifiable. And, as <q>liberalists,</q> or
<q>broad-gauge Christians,</q> they are disposed to recognize all
the existing divisions in faith and practice that are known in
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
Christendom. They even go further and allow that somehow
all are right, and will stand upon an equality in the righteous
judgement of God. This is not perfect love. Charity, over
and above a kindly feeling towards those who are in error, is
unfaithfulness to the truth, to God, and to the very best interests
of our humanity. It is, in all such cases, <emph>love run
mad</emph>! A man should never get so broad in his religion as to
be unfaithful to truth.
</p>

<p>
The phraseology has also been appropriated by skeptics and
semi-infidels to popularize their own semi-infidel philosophy,
which they love to denominate <q>free thought.</q> Deists, Pantheists
and Atheists have seized upon the phrase and appropriated
it to their ungodly speculations. It is true that others,
in getting away from their old creeds, have run past the standard
of truth and right. All this wildness in the <emph>standardless</emph>
field of thought, where Hobbes and other infidels reveled,
without any guide save the civil law, has been denominated
<q>Broad-gauge religion,</q> and <q>Liberalism.</q>
</p>

<p>
We should always remember that going beyond the truth
and the eternal laws of right is <emph>libertinism</emph> or <emph>lawlessness</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<q>Charity,</q> extending, or reaching out thus, is no longer
<q>charity,</q> or <q>perfect love.</q> Such expressions of love are
misdirected, and, if knowingly done, are blameworthy.
Charity is governed by the perfect law of truth; when it is
not destitute of its own divine nature it conducts us in the
<q><emph>straight and narrow way</emph>.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Long as of life the joyous hours remain,</q></l>
<l>Let on this head unfading flowers reside,</l>
<l>There bloom the vernal rose's earliest pride;</l>
<l>And when, our flames commissioned to destroy,</l>
<l>Age step 'twixt Love and me, and intercept the joy;</l>
<l>When my changed these locks no more shall know,</l>
<l>And all its petty honors turn to snow;</l>
<l>Then let me rightly spell of Nature's ways;</l>
<l>To Providence, to him my thoughts I'd raise,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>And love as he throughout remaining days.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Gray.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>

<p>
We should cherish a kind feeling for all our fellows, and
in doing this we should not forget our duty to point them to
truth in word and example, to be ever faithful to truth.
</p>

<p>
There are two great fields of thought for the exercise of the
Christian intellect of the present times. One is the corruptions
of Roman Catholic religion, and the other is the corruptions
of Protestant religions.
</p>

<p>
That both are great feeder-dams to infidelity and skepticism
is demonstrated by the infidel productions of the day. The
dogma of ecclesiastic authority set up in opposition to reason
and scientific discovery is the <emph>infidel's devil</emph>, and a very poor
devil at that. For, when the Pope has interfered to settle a
question it has often happened that his decisions were wrong.
</p>

<p>
On March 5, 1616, the congregation of the Index published
a decree condemning as <q>false, unscriptural and destructive
of Catholic truth,</q> the opinion that the earth moves
round the sun. It is denied by Roman theologians that Paul
IV., who set the Index at work and agreed with its decisions,
was responsible for this decree, but the preponderance of evidence
is against them. It is known that this Pope presided in
a congregation of the Inquisition on February 25, 1616, in
which, after this same opinion, that the sun is the center of
our universe, had been described as <q>absurd, philosophically
false and formally heretical, because expressly contrary to
holy scripture;</q> and the opinion that the earth is not the center
of the universe, but moves, and that daily, <q>absurd, philosophically
false, and, theologically considered, at least erroneous
in faith;</q> Cardinal Bellamine was appointed to visit
Galileo, the astronomer, and order him to give up these false
opinions under pain of imprisonment for refusal. It was thus
that the congregation of the Index took action and published
its decree a week later.
</p>

<p>
In 1633 Galileo, having continued to propagate his views,
was called on by the Inquisition to retract and abjure, and the
formal notice to him to do so states expressly that the declaration
of 1616 was made by the Pope himself, and that resistance
to it was, therefore, heresy, contrary to the doctrine of
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
the Catholic and Apostolic Church. On being brought to
trial, Galileo made a formal abjuration, and on June 30th
Pope Urban VIII. ordered the publication of the sentence,
thereby, according to Roman ecclesiastical law, making
Galileo's compulsory denial of the earth's motion binding on
all Christians as a theological doctrine. Infidels have a vast
deal to say about such an abominable manifestation of ecclesiastic
tyranny and unscientific and unscriptural nonsense.
All intelligent Roman Catholics of to-day reject the judgment
of Popes Paul IV. and Urban VIII. as absurd, and scientifically
and scripturally false. There is not so much as a
hint at papal authority found in the three old creeds known
as the Apostles', the Nicene and the Athanasian, nor in any
ancient gloss upon them. Neither can we find in them any
of the distinguishing special doctrines of the Church of
Rome.
</p>

<p>
Christianity came from the hands of Christ and his apostles
in all its perfections, and as long as infidels stop short of the
New Testament itself, and short of Christ and his apostles, in
their warfare, we may well believe that all their efforts to
blot out Christianity will be vain. Protestants themselves
have demurred as much as infidels against the errors of the
Roman Catholic Church, and fully as much against the errors
of each other as denominations. <q>Truth stands true to her
God, man alone deviates.</q>
</p>

<p>
The greatest difficulty that Christianity ever encountered is
the ignorance and imperfections of its own friends. Protestant
errors are many and serious. But why should the genuine
be discarded on account of the existence of the counterfeit?
And why should we shut our eyes to the importance of
the great work of establishing truth, to the destruction of all
Catholic and Protestant errors of faith and practice by becoming
the advocates of false charity through the adoption of
<q>broad-gauge religion,</q> in a <q>broad-gauge church?</q> Infidels
who, like Col. Ingersoll, assert that <q>no man can control his
belief,</q> had better look in a glass and see themselves as others
see them, before they <emph>strive to</emph> conquer a victory for the <emph>black
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
demon</emph> of despair, by fastening the absurd philosophy of <emph>fatalism</emph>
upon all the world. If men can not help their belief,
who is to blame? Surely, neither Roman Catholics, nor
Protestants, nor those who managed <q>thumbscrews</q> and
<q>hot irons,</q> and other condemned instruments of the dark
ages, nor yet those who now live to be the <q>butt</q> of Colonel
Ingersoll's satire and ridicule. A kind feeling for all, and
unfaithfulness to the truth&mdash;never!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Papal Authority In The Bygone.&mdash;The Infidel's Amusing Attitude.</head>

<p>
The doctrine of papal infallibility amounts to this: that the
decisions of the Pope on faith and morals, being divinely inspired
and infallible, are, when placed upon record, so much
more holy Scripture. This infallibility dogma has been a
great source of mischief and of unbelief. It has accomplished
no good, but a great deal of harm. Some Roman theologians
claim that the Popes have <emph>only once</emph>, up to the present time,
spoken with the formalities necessary to make their utterances
<q><hi rend='italic'>ex cathedra</hi></q> and infallibly binding, and that was when Pius
the Ninth, on December 8, 1854, decreed the Immaculate
Conception of the Virgin Mary; which, if true, belongs to
the realm of unpractical speculation. It was denied as heresy
by orthodox Catholics, including <emph>fourteen Popes</emph>, for a thousand
years, and is contrary to the well-nigh <q>unanimous consent
of the fathers.</q> <emph>See Dr. Pusey, Letter 1, to Newman,
pp. 72-286.</emph> To use such an engine but once in all the centuries,
and then to accomplish so little, aside from furnishing
infidels with something to say, is much like constructing a
vessel of twenty thousand tons capacity to carry one man
across the Atlantic. There is such a thing as Parthenogenesis
known in nature. The Vatican decrees declare that the
Christian religion came perfect from God's hands; that it is
not like a human science, such as medicine or mechanics, which
can be improved or altered by the skill of man. In view of
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
this conceded fact we have no kind of use for the decree of
Pius the Ninth upon the <q>miraculous conception</q>&mdash;<q>Pope
Pius decreed it.</q> Well, well, if Christianity really stood in
need of such a decree it would not have been left off until
December 8, 1854. It has been a bone for infidels to contend
over from that time to the present. The New Testament is
not responsible for it.
</p>

<p>
Men of sense, who are not already traditionized nor Christianized,
find facts enough in the line of papal bulls and decrees
to disgust them so thoroughly as to drive them at once to
reject religion entirely. Sixtus the V., in 1590, declared,
by a perpetual decree, an edition of the Vulgate, just then
out, the sole authentic and standard text, to be received as
such under pain of excommunication. He also decreed that
future editions not conformed to it should have no credit nor
authority. But its errors were so numerous that it was immediately
called in, and a new Vulgate was published by Clement
VIII., in 1592, differing, in several thousand places, from
the one of 1590. This last publication was also issued under
penalty of excommunication for any departure from it. So
Roman Catholic faith rests very largely upon the assumed
authority of the Pope, and this authority has often been exercised
in the wrong, they themselves being witnesses. This
authority, opposed to human progress, has been and is one of
the greatest feeders to Atheism and infidelity. Mr. Draper, in
his work entitled <q>Conflict between Religion and Science,</q>
wishes his readers to understand that he uses the term Christianity
in the sense of Roman Catholicism. The entire work
is one grand scientific effort against popecraft and priestcraft.
His work is well worth a reading; but it is to be remembered
by all who would do Mr. Draper justice that his great antagonist
is the Roman Catholic Church. Will she defend herself
against the charge of being in conflict with science? Is she
in the way of human progress? How does she compare with
Protestants in morality and virtue?
</p>

<p>
Let us give you a few figures, by the way of negative evidence,
upon the question of comparative morality, remembering
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
that it is a sad necessity of our nature to have to determine
which of us has the least of moral miseries in order that we
may know which has the most of virtue. Let this be as it
may, these moral miseries show themselves under two principal
phases, acts of profligacy and acts of violence; corrupt
manners and assassinations. Here is what we read in Jonnes:
</p>

<p>
Assassinations And Attempts To Assassinate In Europe.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{5cm} p{3cm}'; tblcolumns: 'lw(40) lw(20)'">
<row><cell>Protestant&mdash;Scotland, 1835,</cell><cell>1 for 270,000</cell></row>
<row><cell>Protestant&mdash;England,</cell><cell>1 for 178,000</cell></row>
<row><cell>Protestant&mdash;Low Countries, 1824,</cell><cell>1 for 163,000</cell></row>
<row><cell>Protestant&mdash;Prussia, 1824,</cell><cell>1 for 100,000</cell></row>
<row><cell>Catholic States&mdash;Austria, 1809,</cell><cell>1 for 57,000</cell></row>
<row><cell>Catholic&mdash;Spain, 1826,</cell><cell>1 for 4,113</cell></row>
<row><cell>Catholic&mdash;Naples,</cell><cell>1 for 2,750</cell></row>
<row><cell>Catholic&mdash;Roman States,</cell><cell>1 for 750</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Jonnes, vol. 2, p. 257.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Now, if we take the average, we have one assassination, or
one attempt to assassinate, for 180,222 inhabitants in the
aggregate of the four Protestant nations; and one assassination,
or one attempt to assassinate, for 16,153 inhabitants in
the four Catholic nations; in other words, eleven times more
of these crimes among the Roman Catholic nations. The
contrast between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries in
Spain is so very striking, and is painted by a writer in such
lively colors that one is tempted to believe that the picture
was intended to serve as a demonstration.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Spain is a dispossessed queen. For two hundred years and
more diamonds have been falling from her glittering crown.
The source of her wealth, well or ill-gotten, is exhausted forever.
Her treasures are lost, her colonies are gone; she is
deprived of the prestige of that external opulence which
veiled, or, at least dissembled her real and utter poverty.
The nation is exhausted to such a degree, and has been so
long unhappy, that each individual feels but his own misery.
His country has ceased to exist for him. Even those time are
gone when the guerillas called the citizens to arms for the sole
and generous purpose of vindicating the national honor. The
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
despondency and apathy of the nation are visible even in the
battles fought by the Spaniards among themselves in their
civil dissensions. They fight from habit, and discharge their
muskets at their countrymen because they can do nothing else,
and because every shot from their guns may bring them a
piece of bread. A nation reduced to such a state is low indeed;
the chilliness of death is very near seizing upon its
extremities. What a length of time it will require to heal
the wounds of these populations, so brave and so devoted!
How much gold, how much blood have been lavished during
the last seven years without an object, without any conceived
plan!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>What would Charles the Fifth say, if, rising from his
grave he saw his great and glorious Spain struggling thus
miserably in dread uncertainty of her future destinies?
<q>Where are my colonies? Where are my Batavian provinces?
Where is my gigantic power, and the glory of Spain, which
resounded from one hemisphere to the other? What have
you done with my inheritance, ye cowardly and unskillful
men? Where are my treasures; where the victorious fleets
that crossed the ocean to bring back in profusion to my
empire the gold and gems of the New World?</q> The question
naturally arises, what can be the cause of so many evils? of
such utter misery, such extreme ignorance, such disgusting
sloth?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><emph>Tyranny</emph>, says the politician.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><emph>Catholicism</emph>, says the Protestant.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><emph>The Inquisition</emph>, adds the historian.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But these three replies form but one; they are the three
sides of a prism, which, united, give the entire ray of truth.
In truth, Catholicism is the father, the Inquisition and tyranny
the daughters. We are not the first to pen these words; we
only repeat what we have read in the lines we are now going
to submit to the perusal of our readers. It is sufficient for us
to have pointed out the connection of the different causes which
will be assigned by our authorities.</q>
</p>

<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>

<p>
<q>That Catholicism produced the Inquisition, a tribunal of
priests, judging heretics, it is unnecessary to demonstrate, for
the very nature of the institution renders it evident. The
ruling idea of Catholicism, the principle of authority, was the
germ of the Inquisition. It was impossible that the Romish
Church should not extend its principle to its penal code; it
does not doubt in matters of faith, neither does it doubt in
criminal matters. This is the reason why, in the church, the
accused and the guilty have but one and the same appellation.
Whoever is arraigned at her tribunal has heaven and earth
against him; the interrogatory is already a species of torture.
When the church accuses, she seems already convinced; all
her efforts tend to extort the confession of the crime, which, in
virtue of her infallibility, she discovers in darkness; from
this anticipated conviction of the guilt of the accused are
produced all those ambushes and snares laid for the purpose
of obtaining, by surprise, the confession of the accused. The
names of the witnesses are concealed or falsified. Everywhere,
in the most trifling details, it is strikingly evident that,
truth is on one side, and the demon on the other.</q> [See Tardiff,
pp. 139, 140.]
</p>

<p>
In the second place, that Catholicism has produced the
Spanish absolutism of the Catholic kings is sufficiently
shown by the very name given to these kings.
</p>

<p>
<q>Another no less deplorable consequence of the position of
the clergy in Spain and Portugal is, that they have no sooner
confounded the cause of religion with that of despotism,
than this error, producing its consequences, leads to a monstrous
abuse of the word of God. Political fury has invaded
the pulpit and stained it with abject and sacrilegious adulation....
The lips, whose mission is to speak peace,
charity and mutual love, have spoken the language of hatred
and vengeance; horrible vows, abominable threats in the
presence of the tabernacles in which abides the Son of Man,
who sacrificed his life for the salvation of his brethren.</q>
[Affairs de Rome, pp. 250 to 254.]
</p>

<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>

<p>
<q>Spain, since Phillip II., has remained closed and uninfluenced
by the ordinary progress of the human mind elsewhere.
The monkish and despotic spirit has long preserved
itself in the midst of ignorance, without, indeed, acquiring
strength from abroad, but at the same time without permitting
the intelligence of the nation to borrow foreign arms against
it.</q> [Idem, p. 53.]
</p>

<p>
We shall now see this Spanish Catholicism at work; for
three centuries, assisted by its worthy offspring, absolutism
and the Inquisition, and at every ruin, at every crime you
meet with, if you ask who has done this, the reply will assuredly
be: the church of the Pope, the tyranny of the Catholic
kings, the Inquisition of the priests. To convince
yourselves of the fact, you need only put your questions and
listen to the records of history, written not by us, but by men
of talent and skill, who have long enjoyed unquestionable
authority.
</p>

<p>
The expulsion of the Jews and the Moors was the first fruit
of the Catholic Inquisition. <q>Spain,</q> says M. Roseew Saint
Hilaire, <q rend='pre'>exterminated them forever as poisonous plants from
its soil, mortal to heresy. The Jews and the Moors left it in
turn, carrying with them, the former trade, the latter agriculture,
from this disinherited land, to which the New World, to
repair so many losses, vainly bequeathed her sterile treasures.
And let it not be said that Spain, in thus depriving herself of
her most active citizens, was not aware of the extent of her
loss. All her historians concur in the statement that in acting
thus she sacrificed her temporal interests to her religious
convictions, and all are at a loss for words to extol such a glorious
sacrifice.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In banishing the Jews from her territory, Spain, then
acted consistently; her conduct was logically just, but according
to that pitiless logic which ruins States in order to save a
principle. From that period, therefore, a new era begins for
Castile. Until then she had been divided from the rest of
Europe only by her position; foreign, without being hostile,
to the ideas of the continent, she had not begun to wage war
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
with those ideas; but the establishment of the Inquisition is
the first step in the career in which she can never stop.</q>
[Saint Hilaire, vol. 6, p. 52.]
</p>

<p>
<q>It required,</q> says M. Sismondi, <q>about one generation
to accustom the Spaniards to the sanguinary proceedings of
the Inquisition, and to fanaticise the people. This work, dictated
by an infernal policy, was scarcely accomplished, when
Charles the Fifth began his reign. It was probably the fatal
spectacle of the auto-d-fe that imparted to the Spanish soldiers
their ferocity, so remarkable during the whole of that period,
which before that time was so foreign to the national character.</q>
[Sismondi, vol. 3, p. 265.] Who, employing these
instruments, depopulated Spain? <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Inquisition.</hi> <q>To
calculate,</q> says Liorente, secretary to the Holy office, <q>the
number of victims of the Inquisition were to give palpable
proof of the most powerful and active causes of the depopulation
of Spain; for, if to several millions of inhabitants of
which the Inquisitorial system has deprived this kingdom by
the total expulsion of the Jews, the conquered Moors and the
baptized Moorish, we add about 500,000 families entirely destroyed
by the executions of the Holy (?) office, it will be
proved beyond a doubt that had it not been for this tribunal,
and the influence of its maxims, Spain would possess 12,000,000
souls above her present population, supposed to amount
to 11,000,000.</q> [Liorente, vol. 4, p. 242.]
</p>

<p>
<q>The Inquisition ruined and branded with infamy more
than 340,000 persons, whose disgrace was reflected on their
families, and who bequeathed only opprobrium and misery to
their children. Add to these more than 100,000 families
who emigrated in order to escape from the blood-thirsty
tribunal, and it will be seen that the Inquisition has been the
most active instrument of the ruin of Spain. But the most
disastrous of all the acts which it occasioned was the expulsion
of the Moors. If we add to those who were banished
from Spain the countless numbers who perished in the insurrection
of the sixteenth century, and the 800,000 Jews who
left the kingdom, it will be seen that the country lost in the
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
course of a hundred and twenty years about three millions of
its most industrious inhabitants.</q> [Weiss, vol. 2, pp. 60, 61.]
</p>

<p>
<q>The advisors of Phillip III. said to him with affright:
The houses are falling in ruins, and none rebuild them; the
inhabitants flee from the country; villages are abandoned,
fields left uncultivated, and churches deserted. The Cortes
in their turn said to him: if the evil is not remedied, there
will soon be no peasants left to till the ground, no pilots to
steer the ships; none will marry. The kingdom can not subsist
another century if a wholesome remedy be not found.</q>
</p>

<p>
What was the cause of the ignorance so general and so profound
in Spain? The Catholic Inquisition. <q>The commissaries
of the Holy office received orders to oppose the introduction
of books written by the partisans of modern philosophy,
as reprobated by Saint Peter and Saint Paul, and ordered
information to be given against persons known to be attached
to the principles of the insurrection.</q> [Liorente, vol. 4, p.
99.] <q>Theological censures attacked even works on politics,
and on natural, civil and international law. The consequence
is, that those appointed to examine publications condemn and
proscribe all works necessary for the diffusion of knowledge
among the Spaniards. The books that have been published
on mathematics, astronomy, natural philosophy and several
other branches of science connected with those, are not treated
with more favor.</q> [Liorente, vol. 4, p. 420.] <q>The Inquisition
is, perhaps, the most active cause of that intellectual
death that visited Spain at the close of the seventeenth century....
It encouraged ignorance, and instituted a
censorship even for works on jurisprudence, philosophy, and
politics, and for novels that reflected on the avarice and
rapacity of the priests, their dissolute conduct, and their
hypocricy.</q> [Weiss, vol. 2, pp. 319 to 321.] <q>Lastly, if it be
asked what has corrupted the morals both of the clergy and
the laity of the former times and of the present day, the
answer is still, Catholic superstition!</q> [Napoleon Roussell.]
</p>

<p>
Infidels, who are noted leaders in <q>Free Thought,</q> as
it is termed, are invariably men whose religious education
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
was in the religious literature of the old creeds
of centuries gone by, or otherwise in the religious literature
of Roman Catholicism. They live in thought upon religious
matters centuries behind the times, but, in scientific
thought, are too well informed to adhere to their religious
training. Such is the philosophy of infidel making. Let a
man be trained in the obsolete religions of an hundred years
or more ago, and otherwise well educated, and he is, at once,
an infidel. No man is to blame for setting his face like a flint
against old-fashioned Roman Catholicism, and high-toned
Calvinism, nor for repudiating Papal and clerical authority
known in the Spanish Inquisition with all its horrible, unscriptural
and ungodly barbarities. But why it is that the infidel's
religious foot should set away back yonder in the smoke
of the dark ages, and his scientific foot away down here with
the railroad and telegraph, is rather difficult of solution. It is
rather amusing, since all well-educated American Catholics
condemn the Inquisition along with all the abominable cruelties
of the dark ages. And, as for Calvinism, there is not
enough left for seed if it was properly distributed&mdash;<emph>it is old and
thin.</emph>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head><q>Even Now Are There Many Anti-Christs.</q></head>

<p>
Col. Ingersoll says: <q>He (Paine) knew that every abuse
had been embalmed in scripture, that every outrage was in
partnership with some holy text.</q> If such was really true
every rascal, scoundrel and villain should carry a copy of the
Bible. Do they? Are they in affinity with the Bible? Are
they even friendly to it? Things that are in affinity with each
other are drawn together. <q>A fellow feeling makes us very
kind.</q> <q>By their fruits ye shall know them.</q> <q>Birds of a
feather flock together.</q>
</p>

<p>
Before the Bible went to the Sandwich Islands Col. Ingersoll
would have been hailed as a very proper object for a
sumptuous feast. He would have acted wisely in making his
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
last will before starting, but now, since that book has gone
there which embalms every crime (?) he would find an asylum
of safety in which to repose his weary limbs. <emph>How is this?</emph>
Is every outrage in partnership with some holy text? If so,
the Bible would be just one more reason for the continuance
of cannibalism. The secret of Mr. Ingersoll's tirade upon
the Bible may be accounted for when we measure the magnitude
of his infidelity. It is no shallow sort of unbelief, but,
on the contrary, it is deep seated, and one with the infidelity
of his excelling predecessors. Ingersoll intends to have no
superior in unbelief&mdash;you know he is ambitious. Let us give
you a little speech that was made, by one of his particular
friends and co-laborers in this unholy crusade, at Geneva, in
1868. Here it is:
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Brethren, I am come to announce unto you a new gospel,
which must penetrate to the very ends of the world. This
gospel admits of no half measures and hesitations. The old
world must be destroyed and replaced by a new one. The
Lie must be stamped out and give way to truth.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It is our mission to destroy the <emph>Lie</emph>; and to effect this, we
must begin at the very commencement. Now the beginning
of all those lies which have ground down this poor world in
slavery is God. For many hundred years monarchs and
priests have inoculated the hearts and minds of mankind with
this notion of a God ruling over the world. They have also
invented for the people the notion of another world, in which
their God is to punish with eternal torture (not a Bible term)
those who have refused to obey their degrading laws here on
earth. This God is nothing but the personification of absolute
tyranny, and has been invented with a view of either
frightening or alluring nine-tenths of the human race into
submission to the remaining tenth. If there were really a
God, surely he would use that lightning which he holds in
his hand to destroy those thrones, to the steps of which mankind
is chained. He would assuredly use it to overthrow
those altars where the truth is hidden by clouds of lying
incense. Tear out of your hearts the belief in the existence
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
of God; for as long as an atom of that silly superstition
remains in your minds you will never know what freedom is.</q>
</p>

<p>
This has the genuine <emph>Ingersoll ring</emph> upon the subject of
<q><emph>Liberty of Man, Woman and Child.</emph></q> <q rend='pre'>When you have
got rid of this belief in this priest-begotten God, and when,
moreover, you are convinced that your existence, and that of
the surrounding world, is due to the <emph>conglomeration of atoms</emph>,
in accordance with the law of gravity and attraction, then, and
then only, you will have accomplished the first steps toward
liberty, and will experience less difficulty in ridding your
minds of that second lie which tyranny has invented.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The first lie is <emph>God</emph>. The second lie is <emph>Right</emph>.
Might invented the fiction of Right in order to insure and strengthen
her reign; that Right which she herself does not heed, and
which only serves as a barrier against any attacks which may
be made by the trembling and stupid masses of mankind.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><emph>Might</emph>, my friends, forms the sole ground-work of society.
Might makes and unmakes laws, and that might should be in
the hands of the majority. It should be in the possession of
those nine-tenths of the human race whose immense power has
been rendered subservient to the remaining tenth by means of
that lying fiction of <emph>Right</emph>, before which you are accustomed
to bow your heads and to drop your arms. Once penetrated
with a clear conviction of <emph>your own might</emph>, you will be able to
destroy this <emph>mere notion of right</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And when you have freed your minds from the fear of a
God, and from that childish respect for <emph>the fiction of Right</emph>,
then all the remaining chains which bind you, and which are
called <emph>science, civilization, property, marriage, morality and
justice, will snap asunder like threads</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Let your own happiness be your only law. But in order
to get this law recognized, and to bring about the proper relations
which should exist between the majority and minority of
mankind, you must destroy everything which exists in the
shape of state or social organization. So educate yourselves
and your children that, when the great moment for constituting
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
the new world arrives, your eyes may not be blinded and
deceived by the falsehoods of the tyrants of throne and altar.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Our first work must be destruction and annihilation of
everything as it now exists. You must accustom yourselves
to destroy everything, the good with the bad; for if but an
atom of this world remains the new will never be created.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>According to the priests' fables, in days of old, a deluge
destroyed all mankind, but their God especially saved Noah
in order that the seeds of tyranny and falsehoods might be
perpetuated in the new world. When you once begin your
work of destruction, and when the floods of enslaved masses
of the people rise and engulph temples and palaces, then take
heed that no ark be allowed to rescue any atom of this old
world which we consecrate to destruction.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A representative of the kingdom of darkness.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<q>Destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way of
peace they know not.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>What Is To Be The Religion Of The Future.</head>

<p>
<q>Brahmanism has avoided the fatal mistake of Catholic
and Protestant philosophy by assuming an impersonal deity
in three modes of manifestation, while Christian thinkers
have played around the logical contradiction of one personality
in three equal persons for fifteen hundred years. We
must utterly break with the idea of a personal God, and
accept that of one impersonal essence behind all phenomena.</q>
[Hartmann's future religion.]
</p>

<p>
Must we do this? Is there any necessity for it? What
have we to do with <q>the fatal mistake of Catholic and Protestant
philosophy?</q> It was a <emph>mistake</emph>, that's all! <q>Christian
thinkers have played around the logical contradiction of one
personality in three equal persons for fifteen hundred years.</q>
<emph>Have they? 'Tis well!</emph> Christianity requires no man to step into
logical contradiction and stand there. They have done this
<q>for fifteen hundred years.</q> Well, it has been about that
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
long since men, in the prelude of the dark ages, began to
speculate foolishly about the subject of the Divine existence.
There was a purer atmosphere in the first centuries of the
Christian era, in which primitive Christians enjoyed better
conceptions of the Divine Being, to which it is the privilege
of Christians to return. Is it the <emph>only alternative</emph> <q>to break
with the idea of a personal God, and accept that of one impersonal
essence behind all phenomena?</q> <emph>No!</emph> We Christians
affirm nothing that can necessarily be construed with the
Catholic and Protestant <q>mistake</q> concerning the <emph>Trinity</emph>,
nor anything that can be construed with ultra Unitarianism,
which treats of our Lord and Savior simply as an extraordinarily
inspired man. Neither are we under any logical necessity
to <q>break with the idea of a personal God,</q> and form an
alliance with Atheistic philosophy through the adoption of
the idea of a Pantheistic <q>essence behind all phenomena.</q>
Such speculative <emph>nonsense</emph> may be the best that a mind can do
while it is in its own ignorance upon the subject of what it
takes to constitute personality, and while it is also surrounded
with nothing but the darkness of the dark ages, which has
been the legitimate accompaniment of <q>the Catholic and
Protestant <emph>fatal mistake</emph>,</q> but it is not the best that an intelligent
mind, clothed with the sunlight of the gospel of Christ,
and intelligently educated upon the subject of <emph>personality</emph> can
do. <emph>No!</emph> The intelligently informed mind can stand upon
the everlasting bed-rock of truth, which has been raised to
the highest mountain top of Christian thought by the pure,
unadulterated teachings of the Savior of men, which lie
behind the fifteen hundred years of jargon upon the questions
of Trinitarian and Unitarian <q><emph>isms</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>God is a spirit.</q> That settles the question of <q>person</q>
with every well instructed Christian mind. <q>What man
knoweth the things of a man save the spirit of man which is
in him; even so the things of God knoweth no man but the
Spirit of God.</q> The Spirit of God is the <emph>Supreme intelligence</emph>.
And, being such, he is the <emph>Supreme person</emph>, for where
there is <emph>intelligence</emph> there is person. The attributes of personality
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
belong to intelligence, and they belong to nothing else.
If you have an <emph>intelligent</emph> essence, it is, of a logical and
scientific necessity, a person. Let some Pantheistic <q>wiseacre</q>
grapple with this thought.
</p>

<p>
The fatal mistakes are not all confined to Catholics and
Protestants; Pantheists and Scientists have made full as many
mistakes. The great mistake upon the subject of the Divine
existence, which Scientists and Pantheists have made, is the
conclusion that person is simply and necessarily <emph>material</emph>, or
animal existence. So they say, if God is a person he must be
a great big <emph>almighty</emph> man, having great arms and legs, etc. I
have the first Atheist or Pantheist to meet in conversation that
understands the truth of science in reference to this question
of <emph>person</emph>.
</p>

<p>
It is claimed that a Monotheistic Pantheism, that is, the idea
of <emph>one essence</emph>, not person, but <emph>essence</emph>, is to
<emph>unite</emph>, or make one,
the whole human family upon the scientific (sciolistic) base
that man himself is one grand part of the grand all-pervading,
impersonal essence.
</p>

<p>
Religions have their practical results, and, consequently,
bearings upon human society. The Monotheistic idea, which,
it is claimed, is to equalize all beings and things throughout
this vast universe, in the conception that all are parts of the
same grand all-pervading essence, can have only the following
results: First, to wipe out all ideas of a future retribution,
for want of judge, for want of governor; second, to destroy
all distinctions consequent upon the ideas of a divine
moral kingdom, or Kingdom of God among men; third, to
loosen up the religious and moral restraints by removing the
religious sanctions, or promises and threats, which relate to the
future retribution.
</p>

<p>
The advocates of this universal religion of the future, which
is simply universal non-religion, say <q>Protestantism is the
grave digger of Christianity.</q> <q>But Christianity stoutly refuses
to be buried alive,</q> and the multitude of facts that are
continually transpiring demonstrate a living, active existence;
<q>its blood circulates; its pulse is certainly beating;</q> its
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
force is not spent in the least; it is always giving but is never
growing lean; <q>it has a long lease of life.</q> All the trees of
the forest stand together in one grand old struggle for life. It
may be that Christianity will be under the necessity of struggling,
for many years to come, with the Godless forms of <emph>Pantheism</emph>
and <emph>Atheism</emph>, which are simply two different phases of
the same Godless philosophy; but the seeds of the great Christian
tree, in these United States, are being shaken down into
the tender and warm soil of millions of hearts in all our Sunday-schools,
and it will be many a year before Christianity dies.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Bill Of Indictments Against Protestants.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>First.</hi> The idea of total hereditary depravity which never
can be correlated with accountability.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Second.</hi> The idea of those who were never converted
being rewarded according to their own deeds, when they were
never upon trial; for a man must have ability to try before he
can be tried, and that ability must extend to the accomplishment
of that to which the trial relates. Wesley's Discipline
says, The condition of man since the fall of Adam is such
that he can not, by his own natural strength, turn and prepare
himself to faith and calling upon God, without the grace of
God by Christ going before to give him good will, and working
with him when he has that good will.
</p>

<p>
If it is improper to say that a man can by his own natural
strength turn and prepare himself to faith and calling upon
God, it is, also, improper to say he is naturally accountable,
for where ability ceases, accountability also terminates. But
a prop is found in <q>the grace of God by Christ going before
to give a good will, and to work with that good will.</q> So
the grace of God by Christ must go before to displace a bad
will by giving <q>a good one.</q> But this fails to relieve the
doctrine from embarrassment; for if the sinner is unwilling,
has a bad will, it is claimed that the Spirit goes away and
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
leaves him to die in his helplessness. Does the Omnipotent
Spirit go to a man to give him a good will, and then refuse to
give it because the poor man has it not already? Do you
say he resisted? Well, well; suppose he did? <emph>What</emph>, is
that in the way of an Omnipotent Spirit? Who can explain
such nonsense?
</p>

<p>
If I had a son laboring under the conviction that the
Bible is the source of such teachings, and he was to become
disgusted and fall out with it on that account, I should be
proud of his common-sense. Is the poor man mocked in
that manner? If he dies in his sins, on account of his not
being in possession of a good will, can his future reward
be according to the deeds done by himself? No! He was
never on trial&mdash;he had no ability to try. There is just as
much sense in the idea that an ape is on trial. Adam, the
first, ruined him; and Adam, the second, did not help him.
Can a man be justly condemned because he was not what he
never had the power to be?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Third.</hi> The idea that the Lord would command men to
<emph>convert themselves</emph>, knowing, at the same time, that they could
not do it. He commands men to convert. He <q>commands all
men everywhere to repent.</q> He knows, also, that they can
do it; so Protestantism, to the contrary, is an everlasting disgrace
to our religion. The original term translated by the
word convert is in the <emph>imperative active</emph> in many places. Our
translators put it in the passive in the third chapter of Acts,
where it is imperative active in the original. Why they did
this no scholar can tell, unless it was to favor their Calvinistic
ideas upon conversion. The term occurs forty-seven times in
the New Testament, and it is translated thirty-eight times by
the words <emph>turn</emph> and <emph>return</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Paul says he <q>showed to the people that <hi rend='smallcaps'>they should turn
to God</hi>, and do works meet for repentance.</q>
</p>

<p>
This great thought harmonizes with all that is taught upon
the subject of future rewards. A man <emph>can turn</emph>, and he is
therefore accountable. To make man responsible, it must be
shown that he is capable, or able. This is the one great fact
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
that lies at the foundation of future rewards and punishment.
Take this fact away and the justice of God is imperiled by
the teachings of the Bible upon the subject of the future
retribution. I know that men who are under the influence of
the traditions of their fathers and mothers turn from the truth
upon this question and say hard things against it; but I know,
also, that those same men speak the same sentiment when they
talk about the future judgment.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Fourth.</hi> The idea that the Divine Spirit must convert the
man, and that it passes the unwilling soul without giving him
ability that he may be tried, for a man must be able to attain
the desired object, otherwise trial is mere mockery. So, according
to this kind of teaching, justice is mocked, and the
sinner is sent to perdition without anything more than a mock
trial; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, without being tried. If this be not true, the theory
of helplessness growing out of Adam's sin is utterly false,
and man's salvation, under all dispensations, is presented to us
as a matter that was, and is, disposed of by himself, he being
able, in his own natural strength, to turn and prepare himself
to faith and calling upon God. Again, all men pray. It is
instinctive to pray. It is an instinct that defies reason and
philosophy. If men have not <q>natural strength to turn and
prepare themselves to faith and calling upon God,</q> then they
are not <emph>naturally</emph> responsible <emph>nor</emph> accountable.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Fifth.</hi> The idea that the Spirit goes to the unwilling sinner
to give him a good will, and then, because the man is not willing
already, departs from him, leaving him in his sins to continue
in his helpless, wicked condition until, having passed a
mock judgment, he is banished to outer darkness, for if the
man was never able to do otherwise on account of his helplessness,
why should he be condemned? Tell him it is for his
own deeds and you mock his good sense.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Sixth.</hi> The idea that Christ died for an elect few, and
damns all the balance because they don't believe he died for
them, <emph>when he did not</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Seventh.</hi> The idea that Christ died for a few, and commissioned
his disciples to preach the fact to all nations&mdash;to every
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
creature, as <q>glad tidings of great joy,</q> which was <q>to be
unto all people,</q> when it is, according to the doctrine that he
did not die for all, positively no good news to any soul that
was passed by.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Eighth.</hi> The idea that all who are finally lost, will be in
that sad condition because of unbelief, when, if they had
believed that Christ died for them they would have believed
a falsehood, because Calvinists say no soul for whom
Jesus died will be lost.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>A Summary Of Truth.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>First.</hi> By the transgression man's eyes were opened, and
he became as God, to know good and evil.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Second.</hi> He has always had intellectual and moral ability
to turn and serve God, and so enjoy his divine favor.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Third.</hi> He has been required in every dispensation to do
this.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Fourth.</hi> Christ died for all men.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Fifth.</hi> All men may turn and be saved.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Sixth.</hi> God is no respecter of persons; but in every nation
he that feareth him and worketh righteousness shall be
accepted with him.
</p>

<p>
Protestants, do you believe the Bible? Then throw away
your errors. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Let the lower lights be burning!</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Unreasonable Conduct of a Pope.</hi>&mdash;<q>Pope Sixtus
V. expended in three years (from 1586 to 1589) 5,339 scudi,
(about $83,500) in destroying a portion of the Baths of
Diocletian; and 2,560,000 cubic feet of masonry were broken
up. These facts are recorded in a book of accounts found in
the Vatican library, at Rome.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>The Toujee Tourist, of April,
1880.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Ethan Allen, The Infidel, And His
Daughter.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>The damps of death are coming fast,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>My father, o'er my brow;</l>
<l>The past, with all its scenes, are fled,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And I must turn me now</l>
<l>To that dim future which, in vain,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>My feeble eyes descry.</l>
<l>Tell me, my father, in this hour,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In whose stern faith to die.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>In thine? I've watched the scornful smile</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And heard thy withering tone</l>
<l>Whene'er the Christian's humble hope</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Was placed above thine own.</l>
<l>I've heard thee speak of coming death</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Without a shade of gloom,</l>
<l>And laugh at all the childish fears</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That cluster round the tomb.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Or, is it my mother's faith?</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How fondly do I trace,</l>
<l>Through many a weary year long past,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That calm and saintly face!</l>
<l>How often do I call to mind,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Now she is 'neath the sod,</l>
<l>The place, the hour, in which she drew</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>My early thoughts to God.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>'Twas then she took this sacred book,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And from its burning page</l>
<l>Read how its truths support the soul</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In youth and failing age;</l>
<l>And bade me in its precepts live,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And by its precepts die,</l>
<l>That I might share a home of love</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In worlds beyond the sky.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>My father, shall I look above,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Amid the gathering gloom,</l>
<l>To him whose promises of love</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Extend beyond the tomb</l>
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
<l>Or curse the being who hath blessed</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>This chequered path of mine,</l>
<l>And promises eternal rest,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And die, my sire, in thine?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>The frown upon that warrior brow</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Passed, like a cloud, away,</l>
<l>And tears coursed down the rugged cheek</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That flowed not till that day.</l>
<l><q><emph>Not&mdash;not in mine</emph>,</q> with choking voice,</l>
<l>The skeptic made reply;</l>
<l><q rend='pre'><emph>But in thy mother's holy faith,</emph></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><emph>My daughter, mayst thou die.</emph></q></l>
</lg>

<p>
&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Virginia Missionary.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Truth Is Immortal.</head>

<p>
Philosophy has sometimes forgotten God, as great people
never did. The skepticism of the last century could not uproot
Christianity because it lived in the hearts of the millions.
Do you think that infidelity is spreading? Christianity never
lived in the hearts of so many millions as at this moment.
Many forms under which it is professed may decay, for they,
like all that is the work of man's hands, are subject to the
changes and chances of mortal beings, but the spirit of truth
is incorruptible; it may be developed, illustrated and applied;
it can never die; it never can decline. No truth can perish.
No truth can pass away. The flame is undying, though generations
disappear. Wherever immortal truth has started into
being, humanity claims and guards the bequest. Each generation
gathers together the imperishable children of the past
and increases them by the new sons of the light, alike radiant
with immortality.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Bancroft.</hi>
</p>
</div>
</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
